docs/cn_omf.md, before:

# cN OMF

## Kvset (Key-value set)

Kvsets are composed of one hblock, one or more kblocks, and zero or more
vblocks.

### Kblock (Key block)

Kblocks are mblocks that hold keys in sorted order. See cn/omf.h for the
structures associated with the various omf components. All the on-media elements
are stored in little endian ordering.

    +--------+--------+--------+-------------+
    |        |        |        |             |
    | Kblock | WBTree | Bloom  | HyperLogLog |
    | Header |        | Filter |             |
    |        |        |        |             |
    +--------+--------+--------+-------------+

#### Kblock Header

The kblock header contains information about where the other components of the
kblock are located and some other metadata. It also stores the smallest and
largest keys in the kblock as well as the smallest and largest sequence numbers.

note: max keylen == 1350 bytes

    +----------------------+ -- 0 bytes
    | u32 kbh_magic        |
    | u32 kbh_version      |
    | u32 kbh_hlog_doff_pg |
    | u32 kbh_hlog_dlen_pg |
    | u32 kbh_entries      |
    | u32 kbh_tombs        |
    | u32 kbh_key_bytes    |
    | u32 kbh_val_bytes    |
    | u32 kbh_min_koff     |
    | u32 kbh_min_klen     |
    | u32 kbh_max_koff     |
    | u32 kbh_max_klen     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_hoff     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_hlen     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_doff_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_dlen_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_blm_hoff     |
    | u32 kbh_blm_hlen     |
    | u32 kbh_blm_doff_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_blm_dlen_pg  |
    | ...                  |
    |----------------------| -- 1369 bytes (4096 - 1350 - 1350)
    | max_key              |
    | (replicated here)    |
    |----------------------| -- 2746 bytes (4096 - 1350)
    | min_key              |
    | (replicated here)    |
    +----------------------+ -- 4096 bytes

#### Wanna B-Tree (WBTree)

The WBTree consists of the header, leaf nodes and internal nodes. The last
internal node is the root node. Each node is one 4K byte page.

    +--------+--------+----------+-------+
    |        |        |          |       |
    | WBTree | Leaf   | Internal | Root  |
    | Header | Nodes  | Nodes    | Node  |
    |        |        |          |       |
    +--------+--------+----------+-------+

##### WBTree Header

    +----------------------+
    | u32 wbt_magic        |
    | u32 wbt_version      |
    | u16 wbt_root         |
    | u16 wbt_leaf         |
    | u16 wbt_leaf_cnt     |
    | u16 wbt_kmd_pgc      |
    | u32 wbt_reserved1    |
    | u32 wbt_reserved2    |
    +----------------------+

##### WBTree Leaf Node (one 4K page)

    +--------------------+ Leaf Node Header:
    | u16 wbn_magic      |   integrity check
    | u16 wbn_num_keys   |   #entries in this node
    | u32 wbn_kmd        |   offset in kmd region to this node's kmd
    | u16 wbn_pfx_len    |   length of the longest common prefix
    | u16 wbn_padding    |   unused
    |--------------------| Longest common prefix
    | Longest common     |
    | prefix             |
    |--------------------| Entry for 1st key:
    | u16 lfe_koff       |   #bytes into this node
    | u16 lfe_kmd        |   kmd offset. If kmd_off == U16_MAX, actual kmd
    |                    |   offset is a 32bit value at key_off
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------| Entry for last key
    | u16 lfe_koff       |
    | u16 lfe_kmd        |
    |--------------------|
    |--------------------|
    | Last key           |
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------|
    | First key          |
    +--------------------+

##### WBTree Interior Node (one 4K page)

    +--------------------+ Internal Node Header:
    | u16 wbn_magic      |   integrity check
    | u16 wbn_num_keys   |   #entries in this node
    | u32 wbn_kmd        |   offset in kmd region to this node's kmd
    | u16 wbn_pfx_len    |   length of the longest common prefix
    | u16 wbn_padding    |   unused
    |--------------------| Longest common prefix
    | Longest common     |
    | prefix             |
    |--------------------| Entry for 1st internal node entry (ine):
    | u16 ine_koff       |   #bytes into this node
    | u16 ine_left_child |   left child pointer of this ine
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------| Entry for (last-1) key
    | u16 ine_koff       |
    | u16 ine_left_child |
    |--------------------| Entry for last key
    | u16 ine_koff       |
    | u16 ine_left_child |   right child pointer
    |--------------------|
    |--------------------|
    | Last key           |
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------|
    | First key          |
    +--------------------+

#### KMD

    +----------+
    | count    | hg32_1024m 1-4 bytes, #KMD entries that follow
    +----------+
    | kmd[0]   |
    +----------+
    | kmd[1]   |
    +----------+
    | kmd[2]   |
    +----------+

Each kmd entry stores information regarding a value: sequence number and a
pointer to the value (or if the value is small, the value itself). Each kmd
entry can describe one of the following value types:

1. `vtype_val`: Normal value. This stores an offset to the actual value
    located in the vblock.
1. `vtype_cval`: Similar to `vtype_val`, but is a compressed value.
1. `vtype_ival`: Small value. Value length is no greater than 8 bytes.
1. `vtype_zval`: Zero-length value
1. `vtype_tomb`: Tombstone
1. `vtype_ptomb`: Prefix tombstone

```text
+--------------------+
| count              |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_val
| sequence number    |
| vgroup ID          |
| vblock index       |
| vblock offset      |
| value length       |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_ival
| sequence number    |
| value length       |
| value bytes        |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_zval / vtype_tomb / vtype_ptomb
| sequence number    |
+--------------------+
```

The `vblock index` stored in kmd is an index within all the vblocks contained
within a kvset.

#### Bloom Filter

##### Bloom Header

    +-------------------+
    | u32 bh_magic      |
    | u32 bh_version    |
    | u32 bh_bitmapsz   |
    | u32 bh_modulus    |
    | u32 bh_bktshift   |
    | u16 bh_rsvd1      | Reserved
    | u8  bh_rotl       |
    | u8  bh_n_hashes   |
    | u32 bh_rsvd2      | Reserved
    | u32 bh_rsvd3      | Reserved
    +-------------------+

This is followed by the bloom filter.

#### HyperLogLog

This region does not have a separate header, just the hyperloglog (hlog) bytes.
The offset and length in the kblock header points to this region. Each kblock
stores its hlog bytes and the kvset's hlog can be composed using the individual
kblock hlogs.

### Vblock (Value block)

VBlocks consist of values followed by a trailer. The offset of a specific value
and its length are obtained from the kmd entry for this value which is linked to
the corresponding key.

#### Vblock Trailer

Placed at the end of vblock - 4K bytes.

    +---------------------+
    | u32 vbh_magic       |
    | u32 vbh_version     |
    | u32 vbh_min_key_off | Offset of the min key
    | u32 vbh_min_key_len | Length of the min key
    | u32 vbh_max_key_off | Offset of the max key
    | u32 vbh_max_key_len | Length of the max key
    |---------------------|
    | min_key             | 1344 bytes is reserved at all times
    |---------------------|
    | max_key             | 1344 bytes is reserved at all times
    +---------------------+

- `min_key` is the smallest key that references data within this vblock
- `max_key` is the largest key that references data within this vblock

These are used to determine which vblocks will be affected by a kvset split.

### Hblock (Kvset header)

Mblock consisting of kvset metadata.

    +--------+--------+-------+----------+
    |        |        |       |          |
    | Hblock | Vblock | PTree | Hyperlog |
    | Header | Index  |       |          |
    |        | Adjust |       |          |
    +--------+--------+-------+----------+

#### Metadata Header

    +-----------------------------+
    | u32 hbh_magic               | Magic
    | u32 hbh_version             | Version of the hblock
    | u64 hbh_min_seqno           | Minimum sequence number referenced in kvset
    | u64 hbh_max_seqno           | Maximum sequence number referenced in kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_kblocks         | Number of kblocks within the kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_vblocks         | Number of vblocks within the kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_vgroups         | Number of vgroups within the kvset
    | u32 hbh_ptree_off_pg        | Offset of the ptree
    | u32 hbh_ptree_len_pg        | Length of the ptree
    | u32 hbh_hlog_off_pg         | Offset of the hlog
    | u32 hbh_hlog_len_pg         | Length of the hlog (constant 16K)
    | u32 hbh_vblk_idx_adj_off_pg | Offset of the vblock index adjust
    | u32 hbh_vblk_idx_adj_len_pg | Length of the vblock index adjust
    |-----------------------------| -- HBLOCK_HDR_PAGES * PAGE_SIZE - 2 * HSE_KVS_PFX_LEN_MAX
    | max pfx                     |
    | (replicated here)           |
    |-----------------------------| -- HBLOCK_HDR_PAGES * PAGE_SIZE - 2 * HSE_KVS_PFX_LEN_MAX + hbh_max_pfx_len
    | min pfx                     |
    | (replicated here)           |
    +-----------------------------+

#### Vblock Index Adjust

The index indicates that from the previous index + 1 to the current index, all
index adjustments must be subtracted by the accompanying adjustment value.

    +-------------------+
    | ...               |
    +-------------------+
    | u32 vbia_vblk_idx | Barrier vblock index
    | u32 vbia_adj      | Adjustment value
    +-------------------+
    | ...               |
    +-------------------+

#### PTree

This portion has the same format as a regular WBTree. This stores prefix
tombstone data rather than key data however.

#### HyperLogLog

Composite hlog of the entire keyspace contained within the kvset.

Commit message:

Add an hblock to every kvset
An hblock stores various metadata about a kvset. A kvset can only ever
have one hblock.

Most of the data within the hblock is new in order to facilitate the
upcoming kvset split, but in some cases, data was moved from the last
kblock into the hblock.

In the past, the last kblock of a kvset stored information like the min
and max sequence numbers a kvset referenced, the prefix tombstone tree,
and the composite kvset hlog. This information now exists in the hblock.

Signed-off-by: Tristan Partin <tpartin@micron.com>

docs/cn_omf.md, after:

# cN OMF

## Kvset (Key-value set)

Kvsets are composed of one hblock, one or more kblocks, and zero or more
vblocks.

### Kblock (Key block)

Kblocks are mblocks that hold keys in sorted order. See cn/omf.h for the
structures associated with the various omf components. All the on-media elements
are stored in little endian ordering.

    +--------+--------+--------+-------------+
    |        |        |        |             |
    | Kblock | WBTree | Bloom  | HyperLogLog |
    | Header |        | Filter |             |
    |        |        |        |             |
    +--------+--------+--------+-------------+

#### Kblock Header

The kblock header contains information about where the other components of the
kblock are located and some other metadata. It also stores the smallest and
largest keys in the kblock as well as the smallest and largest sequence numbers.

note: max keylen == 1350 bytes

    +----------------------+ -- 0 bytes
    | u32 kbh_magic        |
    | u32 kbh_version      |
    | u32 kbh_hlog_doff_pg |
    | u32 kbh_hlog_dlen_pg |
    | u32 kbh_entries      |
    | u32 kbh_tombs        |
    | u32 kbh_key_bytes    |
    | u32 kbh_val_bytes    |
    | u32 kbh_min_koff     |
    | u32 kbh_min_klen     |
    | u32 kbh_max_koff     |
    | u32 kbh_max_klen     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_hoff     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_hlen     |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_doff_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_wbt_dlen_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_blm_hoff     |
    | u32 kbh_blm_hlen     |
    | u32 kbh_blm_doff_pg  |
    | u32 kbh_blm_dlen_pg  |
    | ...                  |
    |----------------------| -- 1369 bytes (4096 - 1350 - 1350)
    | max_key              |
    | (replicated here)    |
    |----------------------| -- 2746 bytes (4096 - 1350)
    | min_key              |
    | (replicated here)    |
    +----------------------+ -- 4096 bytes

#### Wanna B-Tree (WBTree)

The WBTree consists of the header, leaf nodes and internal nodes. The last
internal node is the root node. Each node is one 4K byte page.

    +--------+--------+----------+-------+
    |        |        |          |       |
    | WBTree | Leaf   | Internal | Root  |
    | Header | Nodes  | Nodes    | Node  |
    |        |        |          |       |
    +--------+--------+----------+-------+

##### WBTree Header

    +----------------------+
    | u32 wbt_magic        |
    | u32 wbt_version      |
    | u16 wbt_root         |
    | u16 wbt_leaf         |
    | u16 wbt_leaf_cnt     |
    | u16 wbt_kmd_pgc      |
    | u32 wbt_reserved1    |
    | u32 wbt_reserved2    |
    +----------------------+

##### WBTree Leaf Node (one 4K page)

    +--------------------+ Leaf Node Header:
    | u16 wbn_magic      |   integrity check
    | u16 wbn_num_keys   |   #entries in this node
    | u32 wbn_kmd        |   offset in kmd region to this node's kmd
    | u16 wbn_pfx_len    |   length of the longest common prefix
    | u16 wbn_padding    |   unused
    |--------------------| Longest common prefix
    | Longest common     |
    | prefix             |
    |--------------------| Entry for 1st key:
    | u16 lfe_koff       |   #bytes into this node
    | u16 lfe_kmd        |   kmd offset. If kmd_off == U16_MAX, actual kmd
    |                    |   offset is a 32bit value at key_off
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------| Entry for last key
    | u16 lfe_koff       |
    | u16 lfe_kmd        |
    |--------------------|
    |--------------------|
    | Last key           |
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------|
    | First key          |
    +--------------------+

##### WBTree Interior Node (one 4K page)

    +--------------------+ Internal Node Header:
    | u16 wbn_magic      |   integrity check
    | u16 wbn_num_keys   |   #entries in this node
    | u32 wbn_kmd        |   offset in kmd region to this node's kmd
    | u16 wbn_pfx_len    |   length of the longest common prefix
    | u16 wbn_padding    |   unused
    |--------------------| Longest common prefix
    | Longest common     |
    | prefix             |
    |--------------------| Entry for 1st internal node entry (ine):
    | u16 ine_koff       |   #bytes into this node
    | u16 ine_left_child |   left child pointer of this ine
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------| Entry for (last-1) key
    | u16 ine_koff       |
    | u16 ine_left_child |
    |--------------------| Entry for last key
    | u16 ine_koff       |
    | u16 ine_left_child |   right child pointer
    |--------------------|
    |--------------------|
    | Last key           |
    |--------------------|
    | ...                |
    |--------------------|
    | First key          |
    +--------------------+

#### KMD

    +----------+
    | count    | hg32_1024m 1-4 bytes, #KMD entries that follow
    +----------+
    | kmd[0]   |
    +----------+
    | kmd[1]   |
    +----------+
    | kmd[2]   |
    +----------+

Each kmd entry stores information regarding a value: sequence number and a
pointer to the value (or if the value is small, the value itself). Each kmd
entry can describe one of the following value types:

1. `vtype_val`: Normal value. This stores an offset to the actual value
    located in the vblock.
1. `vtype_cval`: Similar to `vtype_val`, but is a compressed value.
1. `vtype_ival`: Small value. Value length is no greater than 8 bytes.
1. `vtype_zval`: Zero-length value
1. `vtype_tomb`: Tombstone
1. `vtype_ptomb`: Prefix tombstone

```text
+--------------------+
| count              |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_val
| sequence number    |
| vgroup ID          |
| vblock index       |
| vblock offset      |
| value length       |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_ival
| sequence number    |
| value length       |
| value bytes        |
+--------------------+
| vtype              | vtype_zval / vtype_tomb / vtype_ptomb
| sequence number    |
+--------------------+
```

The `vblock index` stored in kmd is an index within all the vblocks contained
within a kvset.

#### Bloom Filter

##### Bloom Header

    +-------------------+
    | u32 bh_magic      |
    | u32 bh_version    |
    | u32 bh_bitmapsz   |
    | u32 bh_modulus    |
    | u32 bh_bktshift   |
    | u16 bh_rsvd1      | Reserved
    | u8  bh_rotl       |
    | u8  bh_n_hashes   |
    | u32 bh_rsvd2      | Reserved
    | u32 bh_rsvd3      | Reserved
    +-------------------+

This is followed by the bloom filter.

#### HyperLogLog

This region does not have a separate header, just the hyperloglog (hlog) bytes.
The offset and length in the kblock header points to this region. Each kblock
stores its hlog bytes and the kvset's hlog can be composed using the individual
kblock hlogs.

### Vblock (Value block)

VBlocks consist of values followed by a trailer. The offset of a specific value
and its length are obtained from the kmd entry for this value which is linked to
the corresponding key.

#### Vblock Trailer

Placed at the end of vblock - 4K bytes.

    +---------------------+
    | u32 vbh_magic       |
    | u32 vbh_version     |
    | u32 vbh_min_key_off | Offset of the min key
    | u32 vbh_min_key_len | Length of the min key
    | u32 vbh_max_key_off | Offset of the max key
    | u32 vbh_max_key_len | Length of the max key
    |---------------------|
    | min_key             | 1344 bytes is reserved at all times
    |---------------------|
    | max_key             | 1344 bytes is reserved at all times
    +---------------------+

- `min_key` is the smallest key that references data within this vblock
- `max_key` is the largest key that references data within this vblock

These are used to determine which vblocks will be affected by a kvset split.

### Hblock (Kvset header)

Mblock consisting of kvset metadata.

    +--------+--------+-------+----------+
    |        |        |       |          |
    | Hblock | Vblock | PTree | Hyperlog |
    | Header | Index  |       |          |
    |        | Adjust |       |          |
    +--------+--------+-------+----------+

#### Metadata Header

    +----------------------------------+
    | u32 hbh_magic                    | Magic
    | u32 hbh_version                  | Version of the hblock
    | u64 hbh_min_seqno                | Minimum sequence number referenced in kvset
    | u64 hbh_max_seqno                | Maximum sequence number referenced in kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_ptombs               | Number of prefix tombstones
    | u32 hbh_num_kblocks              | Number of kblocks within the kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_vblocks              | Number of vblocks within the kvset
    | u32 hbh_num_vgroups              | Number of vgroups within the kvset
    | struct wbt_hdr_omf hbh_ptree_hdr | Prefix tombstone tree header
    | u32 hbh_ptree_off_pg             | Offset of the ptree
    | u32 hbh_ptree_len_pg             | Length of the ptree
    | u32 hbh_hlog_off_pg              | Offset of the hlog
    | u32 hbh_hlog_len_pg              | Length of the hlog (constant 16K)
    | u32 hbh_vblk_idx_adj_off_pg      | Offset of the vblock index adjust
    | u32 hbh_vblk_idx_adj_len_pg      | Length of the vblock index adjust
    | u32 hbh_max_pfx_off              | Offset of the max prefix
    | u32 hbh_max_pfx_len              | Length of the max prefix
    | u32 hbh_min_pfx_off              | Offset of the min prefix
    | u32 hbh_min_pfx_len              | Length of the min prefix
    |----------------------------------| -- HBLOCK_HDR_PAGES * PAGE_SIZE - 2 * HSE_KVS_PFX_LEN_MAX
    | max pfx                          |
    | (replicated here)                |
    |----------------------------------| -- HBLOCK_HDR_PAGES * PAGE_SIZE - 2 * HSE_KVS_PFX_LEN_MAX + hbh_max_pfx_len
    | min pfx                          |
    | (replicated here)                |
    +----------------------------------+

#### Vblock Index Adjust

The index indicates that from the previous index + 1 to the current index, all
index adjustments must be subtracted by the accompanying adjustment value.

    +-------------------+
    | ...               |
    +-------------------+
    | u32 vbia_vblk_idx | Barrier vblock index
    | u32 vbia_adj      | Adjustment value
    +-------------------+
    | ...               |
    +-------------------+

#### PTree

This portion has the same format as a regular WBTree. This stores prefix
tombstone data rather than key data however.

#### HyperLogLog

Composite hlog of the entire keyspace contained within the kvset.
